.TH BSPRUN 1 
.SH NAME
bsprun \- The BSPonMPI program launcher
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR bsprun 
.RI [ OPTIONS ...]
.IR command ...
.fi
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Runs a BSPlib program that has been compiled with BSPonMPI's 
.B bspcc
or
.B bspcxx
compiler frontend.
It is essentally a wrapper around the
.I mpirun
from the MPI implementation that was used to build BSPonMPI.
For directions on how to launch a program, it is, therefore, essential
to consult the 
.I mpirun
(1) manual as well. However, the following will just work:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ bsprun -n 5 ./a.out
.RE
.fi
.PP
which runs ./a.out with 5 processes.
If the system requires a different launcher, then the user
is invited to copy the 
.B bsprun
shell script and to modify it accordingly. 
Alternatively, the 
.B \-\-show
option can be used to generate a template launch script.
.
.SH OPTIONS
Only 
.B bsprun
specific options are listed here. 
All unrecognized options are passed on to the
.I mpirun
command.
.TP
.BI \-n\  nprocs ,\ \-\-nprocs= nprocs
Launches the program with at most \fInprocs\fR processes.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Gives a brief usage overview.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Shows version information.
.TP
.BR \-\-show
Instead of launching the command it show what exactly will be executed.
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-msg\-size=\fIbytes\fR
Restricts the runtime to messages equal or less than \fIbytes\fR bytes.
It may be necessary to change this value to improve speed or work 
around MPI implementation specific stabilty issues.
By default this value is equal to 
.I INT_MAX.
.TP
.BR \-\-small\-exchange\-size=\fIbytes\fR
Specifies the maximum number of \fIbytes\fR per process
that is still considered to be a small exchange.
For small exchanges an 
.I MPI_Alltoall 
(3) is used, for which there is an O(log p) algorithm on high-bandwidth
networks, where p is the number of processes.
For large exchanges throughput
optimal methods, such as 
.I MPI_Put
(3) when linked with \-\-rma or
.I MPI_Irsend
(3) and
.I MPI_Irecv
(3) when linked with \-\-msg are used. 
These have, however, also a higher latency of O(p). 
Hence, the general advice is to increase this value if your application
is sensitive to synchronisation latency.
By default a communication of 1024 bytes per process or less is a small
exchange.
.TP
.BR \-\-assume\-linear\-cost\-for\-p2p=\fIalpha\fR:\fIbeta\fR
In order to determine how much data is communicated through the
latency optimal method and how much through the throughput optimal method,
the system requires an estimate of the ratio between a the startup
time and the reciprocal throughput of a point-to-point message.
By default this is assumed to be \fIalpha\fR:\fIbeta\fR = 10000:1.
.TP
.BR \-\-assume\-bsp\-parameters=\fIL\fR:\fIg\fR
The included collectives library requires estimates of the BSP
machine parameters L and g in order to choose the best algorithm
for each call.
By default these values are assumed to be \fIL\fR = P*\fIalpha\fR, where
P is the number of processes, and \fIg\fR = \fIbeta\fR.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B bsprun
is essentially a wrapper around 
.I mpirun
(1) but sets an additional set of environment variables:
.TP
.B BSPONMPI_MAX_MSG_SIZE
Sets the maximum message size. 
See the description of 
.B \-\-max-msg-size
above.
.TP
.B BSPONMPI_SMALL_EXCHANGE_SIZE
Sets the maximum for small exchanges.
See the description of
.B \-\-small\-exchange\-size
above.
.TP
.B BSPONMPI_P2P_LATENCY
Sets the startup cost for point-to-point messages.
See the description of
.B \-\-assume\-linear\-cost\-for\-p2p
above.
.TP
.B BSPONMPI_P2P_MSGGAP
Sets the reciprocal throughput for point-to-point messages.
See the description of 
.B \-\-assume\-linear\-cost\-for\-p2p
above.
.TP
.B BSC_L
Sets the BSP parameter \fIL\fR.
See the description of 
.B \-\-assume\-bsp\-parameters
above.
.TP
.B BSC_G
Sets the BSP parameter \fIg\fR.
See the description of 
.B \-\-assume\-bsp\-parameters
above.
.P
In order for the dynamic linker to find the BSPonMPI dynamic
library the
.B DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH
and
.B LD_LIBRARY_PATH
variables are extended to include the path to the library.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Wijnand J. Suijlen
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B mpirun
(1),
.B bspcc
(1)
.PP
"BSPlib: The BSP programming library," by J. M. D. Hill, W. F. McColl, D. C. Stefanescu, M. W. Goudreau, K. Lang, S. B. Rao, T. Suel, Th. Tsantilas, R. H. Bisseling, Elsevier, Parallel Computing, Volume 24, Issue 14, December 1998, pages 1947–1980. 
