.TH BSPCC 1 
.SH NAME
bspcc \- The BSPonMPI C compiler front end
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.HP 6 
\fBbspcc\fR [\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR] [\fB\-\-show\fR] 
[\fB\-\-mcbsp\fR] [\fB\-\-msg\fR] [\fB\-\-rma\fR]
.IR sources ...
.fi
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Compiles a C program that uses BSPlib program and links it with BSPonMPI.
It is essentially a wrapper around the
.I mpicc
from the MPI implementation that was used to build BSPonMPI.
All options that are not recognised by 
.B bspcc
are passed on verbatim to 
.I mpicc\fR.
.
.SH OPTIONS
Only 
.B bspcc
specific options are listed here. 
All unrecognised options are passed on to the
.I mpicc
command.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Gives a brief usage overview.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Shows version information.
.TP
.BR \-\-show
Do not do anything but show what exactly will be executed.
.TP
.BR \-\-mcbsp
Use the MulticoreBSP for C compatible headers. 
By default the header that is compatible with the original BSPlib
paper by Hill et al., is loaded.
.TP
.BR \-\-msg
Link with the runtime based on MPI message-passing, which uses a protocol
based on 
.I MPI_Irsend
(3)/
.I MPI_Isend
(3) - 
.I MPI_Irecv
(3) -
.I MPI_Waitsome\fR.
The effectiveness of this protocol depends on the MPI implementation and
the fabric. 
Its performance might not conform the BSP cost model, in which case
the remote memory access protocol should be used (use the
.BR
\-\-rma
option ).
.TP
.BR \-\-rma
Link with the runtime based on MPI remote memory access (RDMA), which uses
a protocol based on
.I MPI_Put
(3) and
.I
MPI_Fence
(3). Note that some MPI implementations have poor RDMA performance, even
when the fabric supports it.
Also, RDMA might be buggy in some implementations. 
However, when MPI knows how to handle RDMA correctly, its performance
is unparalleled.
For that reason, this protocol is chosen by default.
.
.SS Experimental
.TP
.BR \-\-rma\-prof
Link with the RDMA runtime and enable the internal profiler.
The internal profiler will measure usage of BSPlib primitives
that are being called between 
.I bsp_begin
(3) and
.I bsp_end
(3), and writes a summary of the statistics when 
.I bsp_end
is called. 
Statistics are labelled per category and displayed hierarchically:
.RS
.TP 
.B TOTAL
The total time between 
.I bsp_begin
and
.I bsp_end\fR.
.TP
.B IMBALANCE
The total time lost due to load imbalance.
.TP
.B SYNC
The total time spent in 
.I bsp_sync
excluding imbalance
.TP
.B PUT, GET, HPPUT, HPGET
Time spent and data sent for
.IR bsp_put ,
.IR bsp_get , 
.IR bsp_hpput ,
and
.IR bsp_hpget ,
respectively
.TP
.B BSMP
Time spent and data sent for BSMP primitives
.TP
.B MPI_META_A2A
Time spent and data sent in internal meta-data exchanges
.TP
.B MPI_LARGE_RECV
Data received through 
.I MPI_Irecv
.TP
.B MPI_LARGE_SEND
Data sent through 
.I MPI_Irsend
and
.I MPI_Isend
.TP
.B MPI_PUT
Data sent through 
.I MPI_Put
.TP 
.B MPI_UNBUF
Data sent through unbuffered routines
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-msg\-prof
Link with the message-passing runtime and enable the internal profiler.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Wijnand J. Suijlen
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B mpicc
(1),
.B bsprun
(1)
.PP
"BSPlib: The BSP programming library," by J. M. D. Hill, W. F. McColl, D. C. Stefanescu, M. W. Goudreau, K. Lang, S. B. Rao, T. Suel, Th. Tsantilas, R. H. Bisseling, Elsevier, Parallel Computing, Volume 24, Issue 14, December 1998, pages 1947–1980. 
